Add the otelcol tcplog receiver (#2701)
grafana/alloy: docs/sources/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.receiver.tcplog.md

If the `tls` block isn't provided, TLS won't be used for connections to the server.

{{< docs/shared lookup="reference/components/otelcol-tls-server-block.md" source="alloy" version="<ALLOY_VERSION>" >}}
## Exported fields

`otelcol.receiver.tcplog` doesn't export any fields.

## Component health

`otelcol.receiver.tcplog` is only reported as unhealthy if given an invalid configuration.

## Debug information

`otelcol.receiver.tcplog` doesn't expose any component-specific debug information.

## Debug metrics

`otelcol.receiver.tcplog` doesn't expose any component-specific debug metrics.

## Example

This example receives log messages from TCP and logs them.

```alloy
otelcol.receiver.tcplog "default" {
    listen_address = "localhost:1515"
    output {
        logs = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
    }
}

otelcol.exporter.debug "default" {}
```

[exporter-examples]: ../otelcol.exporter.tcplog/#use-the-otelcolprocessortransform-component-to-format-logs-from-lokisourcetcplog
[encoding-documentation]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/receiver/tcplogreceiver/README.md#supported-encodings

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[net-semconv]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/attributes-registry/network.md#network-attributes

```

---
canonical: https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.receiver.tcplog/

> description: Learn about otelcol.receiver.tcplog
> title: otelcol.receiver.tcplog
> ---
> 
> <span class="badge docs-labels__stage docs-labels__item">Experimental</span>
> 
> # otelcol.receiver.tcplog

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: Learn about otelcol.receiver.tcplog
labels:
  stage: experimental
title: otelcol.receiver.tcplog
---

# `otelcol.receiver.tcplog`
```

We can use the labels.stage instead of the span for the Experimental badge

{{< docs/shared lookup="stability/experimental.md" source="alloy" version="<ALLOY_VERSION>" >}}

`otelcol.receiver.tcplog` accepts log messages over a TCP connection and forwards them as logs to other `otelcol.*` components.

{{< admonition type="note" >}}
`otelcol.receiver.tcplog` is a wrapper over the upstream OpenTelemetry Collector `tcplog` receiver.
Bug reports or feature requests will be redirected to the upstream repository, if necessary.
{{< /admonition >}}

You can specify multiple `otelcol.receiver.tcplog` components by giving them different labels.

## Usage

```alloy

> otelcol.receiver.tcplog "LABEL" {
>   listen_address = "IP_ADDRESS:PORT"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
otelcol.receiver.tcplog "<LABEL>" {
  listen_address = "<IP_ADDRESS:PORT>"
```

  output {
    logs    = [...]
  }
}
```

## Arguments

> The following arguments are supported:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use the following arguments with `otelcol.receiver.tcplog`:
```

> | Name                            | Type     | Description                                                                                                  | Default | Required |
> |---------------------------------|----------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------|----------|
> | `listen_address`                | `string` | The `<host:port>` address to listen to for logs messages.                                                    |         | yes      |
> | `max_log_size`                  | `string` | The maximum size of a log entry to read before failing.                                                      | `"1MiB"` | no       |
> | `one_log_per_packet`            | `bool`   | Skip log tokenization, improving performance when messages always contain one log and multiline is not used. | `false` | no       |
> | `add_attributes`                | `bool`   | Add `net.*` attributes to log messages according to [OpenTelemetry semantic conventions][net-semconv].                        | `false` | no       |
> | `encoding`                      | `string` | The encoding of the log messages.                                                                            | `"utf-8"` | no       |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Name                 | Type     | Description                                                                                                 | Default   | Required |
| -------------------- | -------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --------- | -------- |
| `listen_address`     | `string` | The `<HOST:PORT>` address to listen to for logs messages.                                                   |           | yes      |
| `add_attributes`     | `bool`   | Add `net.*` attributes to log messages according to [OpenTelemetry semantic conventions][net-semconv].      | `false`   | no       |
| `encoding`           | `string` | The encoding of the log messages.                                                                           | `"utf-8"` | no       |
| `max_log_size`       | `string` | The maximum size of a log entry to read before failing.                                                     | `"1MiB"`  | no       |
| `one_log_per_packet` | `bool`   | Skip log tokenization, improving performance when messages always contain one log and multiline isn't used. | `false`   | no       |
```

Minor table formatting, alphabetize the optional args, uppercase the placeholder variables.

The `encoding` argument specifies the encoding of the incoming log messages.

> `encoding` must be one of `utf-8`, `utf-16le`, `utf-16be`, `ascii`, `big5`, `nop`. 
> See the upstream receiver [documentation][encoding-documentation] for more details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`encoding` must be one of `utf-8`, `utf-16le`, `utf-16be`, `ascii`, `big5`, or `nop`. 
Refer to the upstream receiver [documentation][encoding-documentation] for more details.
```

The `max_log_size` argument has a minimum value of `64KiB`.

## Blocks

> The following blocks are supported inside the definition of
> `otelcol.receiver.tcplog`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use the following blocks with `otelcol.receiver.tcplog`:
```

> | Hierarchy        | Block                | Description                                                                                     | Required |
> |------------------|----------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------|
> | multiline       | [multiline][]        | Configures rules for multiline parsing of incoming messages                                      | no       |
> | tls              | [tls][]              | Configures TLS for the TCP server.                                                       | no       |
> | retry_on_failure | [retry_on_failure][] | Configures the retry behavior when the receiver encounters an error downstream in the pipeline. | no       |
> | debug_metrics    | [debug_metrics][]    | Configures the metrics that this component generates to monitor its state.                      | no       |
> | output           | [output][]           | Configures where to send received telemetry data.                                               | yes      |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Block                                  | Description                                                                                     | Required |
| -------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------- |
| [`output`][output]                     | Configures where to send received telemetry data.                                               | yes      |
| [`debug_metrics`][debug_metrics]       | Configures the metrics that this component generates to monitor its state.                      | no       |
| [`multiline`][multiline]               | Configures rules for multiline parsing of incoming messages                                     | no       |
| [`retry_on_failure`][retry_on_failure] | Configures the retry behavior when the receiver encounters an error downstream in the pipeline. | no       |
| [`tls`][tls]                           | Configures TLS for the TCP server.                                                              | no       |
```

Merge Hierarchy and Block columns, format table, move required arg to top, use code format for block names.

> 
> [tls]: #tls-block
> [multiline]: #multiline-block
> [retry_on_failure]: #retry-on-failure-block
> [debug_metrics]: #debug_metrics-block
> [output]: #output-block
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[tls]: #tls
[multiline]: #multiline
[retry_on_failure]: #retry_on_failure
[debug_metrics]: #debug_metrics
[output]: #output
```

> ### multiline block
> 
> The `multiline` block configures logic for splitting incoming log entries.
> The following arguments are supported:
> 
> | Name                 | Type     | Description                                                     | Default | Required |
> |----------------------|----------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|---------|----------|
> | `line_start_pattern` | `string` | A regular expression that matches the beginning of a log entry. |         | no       |
> | `line_end_pattern`   | `string` | A regular expression that matches the end of a log entry.       |         | no       |
> | `omit_pattern`       | `bool`   | Omit the start/end pattern from the split log entries.          | `false` | no       |
> 
> A `multiline` block must contain either `line_start_pattern` or `line_end_pattern`.
> 
> If a `multiline` block is not set, log entries will not be split.
> 
> ### tls block
> 
> The `tls` block configures TLS settings used for a server. If the `tls` block
> isn't provided, TLS won't be used for connections to the server.
> 
> {{< docs/shared lookup="reference/components/otelcol-tls-server-block.md" source="alloy" version="<ALLOY_VERSION>" >}}
> 
> ### retry on failure block
> 
> The `retry_on_failure` block configures the retry behavior when the receiver encounters an error downstream in the pipeline.
> A backoff algorithm is used to delay the retry upon subsequent failures.
> The following arguments are supported:
> 
> | Name               | Type       | Description                                                                                               | Default      | Required |
> |--------------------|------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------|----------|
> | `enabled`          | `bool`     | If true, the receiver will pause reading a file and attempt to resend the current batch of logs on error. | `false`      | no       |
> | `initial_interval` | `duration` | The time to wait after first failure to retry.                                                            | `1s`   | no       |
> | `max_interval`     | `duration` | The maximum time to wait after applying backoff logic.                                                    | `30s` | no       |
> | `max_elapsed_time` | `duration` | The maximum age of a message before the data is discarded.                                                | `5m`  | no       |
> 
> If `max_elapsed_time` is set to `0` data will never be discarded.
> 
> ### debug_metrics block
> 
> {{< docs/shared lookup="reference/components/otelcol-debug-metrics-block.md" source="alloy" version="<ALLOY_VERSION>" >}}
> 
> ### output block
> 
> {{< docs/shared lookup="reference/components/output-block-logs.md" source="alloy" version="<ALLOY_VERSION>" >}}
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### `output`

<span class="badge docs-labels__stage docs-labels__item">Required</span>

{{< docs/shared lookup="reference/components/output-block-logs.md" source="alloy" version="<ALLOY_VERSION>" >}}

### `debug_metrics`

{{< docs/shared lookup="reference/components/otelcol-debug-metrics-block.md" source="alloy" version="<ALLOY_VERSION>" >}}

### `multiline`

The `multiline` block configures logic for splitting incoming log entries.
The following arguments are supported:

| Name                 | Type     | Description                                                     | Default | Required |
|----------------------|----------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|---------|----------|
| `line_end_pattern`   | `string` | A regular expression that matches the end of a log entry.       |         | no       |
| `line_start_pattern` | `string` | A regular expression that matches the beginning of a log entry. |         | no       |
| `omit_pattern`       | `bool`   | Omit the start/end pattern from the split log entries.          | `false` | no       |

A `multiline` block must contain either `line_start_pattern` or `line_end_pattern`.

If a `multiline` block isn't set, log entries won't be split.

### `retry_on_failure`

The `retry_on_failure` block configures the retry behavior when the receiver encounters an error downstream in the pipeline.
A backoff algorithm is used to delay the retry upon subsequent failures.
The following arguments are supported:

| Name               | Type       | Description                                                                                                               | Default | Required |
| ------------------ | ---------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------- | -------- |
| `enabled`          | `bool`     | If set to `true` and an error occurs, the receiver will pause reading the log files and resend the current batch of logs. | `false` | no       |
| `initial_interval` | `duration` | The time to wait after first failure to retry.                                                                            | `1s`    | no       |
| `max_elapsed_time` | `duration` | The maximum age of a message before the data is discarded.                                                                | `5m`    | no       |
| `max_interval`     | `duration` | The maximum time to wait after applying backoff logic.                                                                    | `30s`   | no       |

If `max_elapsed_time` is set to `0` data is never discarded.

### `tls`

The `tls` block configures TLS settings used for a server.
If the `tls` block isn't provided, TLS won't be used for connections to the server.

{{< docs/shared lookup="reference/components/otelcol-tls-server-block.md" source="alloy" version="<ALLOY_VERSION>" >}}
```

Move required blocks to the top, alphabetize the optional blocks, alphabetize the table rows, rework the description of retry_on_failure, fix heading 3 formatting.

## Exported fields

> `otelcol.receiver.tcplog` does not export any fields.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`otelcol.receiver.tcplog` doesn't export any fields.
```

## Component health

> `otelcol.receiver.tcplog` is only reported as unhealthy if given an invalid
> configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`otelcol.receiver.tcplog` is only reported as unhealthy if given an invalid configuration.
```

## Debug information

> `otelcol.receiver.tcplog` does not expose any component-specific debug
> information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`otelcol.receiver.tcplog` doesn't expose any component-specific debug information.
```

## Debug metrics

> `otelcol.receiver.tcplog` does not expose any component-specific debug metrics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`otelcol.receiver.tcplog` doesn't expose any component-specific debug metrics.
```

## Example

> This example receives log messages from TCP and logs them.
> ```alloy

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This example receives log messages from TCP and logs them.

```alloy
```

otelcol.receiver.tcplog "default" {
    listen_address = "localhost:1515"
    output {
        logs = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
    }
}

otelcol.exporter.debug "default" {}
```

[exporter-examples]: ../otelcol.exporter.tcplog/#use-the-otelcolprocessortransform-component-to-format-logs-from-lokisourcetcplog

> [encoding-documentation]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/receiver/tcplogreceiver/README.md#supported-encodings
> <!-- START GENERATED COMPATIBLE COMPONENTS -->

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[encoding-documentation]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/receiver/tcplogreceiver/README.md#supported-encodings

<!-- START GENERATED COMPATIBLE COMPONENTS -->
```
